samba_statusd(1) -- part of the samba-exporter package
=============================================

## SYNOPSIS

`samba_statusd` [options]

## DESCRIPTION

**samba_statusd** The `smbstatus` part samba-exporter package.<br>
The tool is usually stated as daemon by systemd as `samba_statusd.service` using the `start_samba_statusd` script.<br>
It communicates with the `samba_exporter.service` using the named pipes `/run/samba_exporter.request.pipe` and `/run/samba_exporter.response.pipe`.

## OPTIONS

You might want to use one of the following optional parameters.

  * `-help`: 
    Print the programs help message and exit

  * `-print-version`:
    With this flag the program will only print it's version and exit       

  * `-test-mode`:
        Run the program in test mode.<br>
        In this mode the program will always return the same test data. To work with samba_statusd both programs needs to run in test mode or not.

  * `-verbose`:
        With this flag the program will print verbose output

To change the behavior of the samba_statusd service update the `/etc/default/samba_statusd` according to your needs. 
You can add any option shown in the help output of `samba_statusd` to the `ARGS` variable.<br>
You may not want to start the service with arguments that will exit before listening starts like `-help` or `-print-version`. 


## EXAMPLES

To stop, start or restart the service use `systemctl`, e. g.: `sudo systemctl stop samba_statusd`. 
To read the log output use `journalctl`, e. g. `sudo journalctl -u samba_statusd`.<br>
**Remark:** Due to the services dependencies `samba_exporter` service stops whenever `samba_statusd` stops. 
And `samba_statusd` always starts when `samba_exporter` is started if not already running.

## BUGS

See <https://github.com/imker25/samba_exporter/issues> <br>
In case you found a new bug please also report as github issue on the projects page.

## COPYRIGHT

samba_statusd is Copyright (C) 2021 Tobias Zellner <tobi@backfraki.de>

## SEE ALSO

samba_exporter(1), start_samba_statusd(1)